I would like to talk about doctors there
among our most trusted professionals
nearly 70% of us write them highly on
ethical standards our lives and
occasionally our balls are in their
hands which is why it was especially
troubling last week to see this with his
syndicated TV show magazine and website
dr. oz has become one of America's most
trusted Doc's but on Capitol Hill
Tuesday he was on the hot seat excuse me
but any seat dr. oz is sitting on is the
hot seat so what did the doctor do they
criticized the talk-show hosts for
describing untested weight loss
supplements as magical or miraculous I
want you write it down Garcinia cambogia
because it may be the simple solution
you've been looking for to bust your
body fat for good now I've got the
number-one miracle and a bottle to burn
your fat lightning in a bottle
it's a miracle flower to fight fat
miracle flowers are you a doctor or an
Old West traveling salesman and I got
something miraculous for you ladies and
gentlemen and monkeys pour mixed with
five petals of a rose and a thimble full
of otter semen guaranteed to cure your
lumbago step right up step right over
here the Senate hearing was about the
marketing of dietary supplements and
unfortunately no one is more effective
at that than dr. oz Oz's advice is so
influential that one mention of a
product can cause sales to skyrocket the
phenomenon even has its own name dr. oz
effect after dr. oz touted a substance
called green coffee bean extract one
company in Florida sold half a million
bottles well what what's so wrong with
that name me one case where a man named
oz claimed mystical powers and led
people horribly as
namely one case you can't do it the only
problem with the dr.oz effect is that
magic pills don't technically exist and
dr. oz knows that do you believe that
there's a miracle pill out there there's
not a pill that's gonna help you
long-term lose weight and live your best
life without diet and exercise do you
believe there's a magic weight-loss cure
out there it the word Metin if you're
selling something because it's magical
no that would be ridiculous no one is
claiming there's a magic pill out there
that would be stupid
this little bean has scientists saying
date time and magic weight-loss cure for
every body type see he never said there
was a magic pill he said there was a
magic bean that's clearly entirely
different because magic beans are a very
real thing that you tried to cow for so
you can steal a golden heart from a
giant that's science and by the way a
recent study found the main ingredient
in those magic beans not only fails to
help lab mice it gave them the early
symptoms of diabetes though if you're a
lab mouse with diabetes you got off easy
good luck getting any sympathy in the
lab mouse support group oh I'm sorry you
can't have any candy I've got an ear
growing out of my back Jeff's
got herpes sorry Jeff his his mission
dr. oz is a doctor and one word degrees
from two Ivy League schools
he's also dangerously likeable watch how
morning joe reacted after seeing bits of
his congressional testimony i live up in
once it didn't can I just say for us I
like duck
I will confirm or deny like I'm a lot
like diners coming here with really good
advice rated by nod and listen if he's
got magic coffee beans I want some of it
you just showed a report that implied
they didn't work he basically just in an
emperor's new clothes piece and they
ended it by saying by the way the
Emperor's tailor was incredible that guy
can stitch and to give dr. Ross the
benefit of overwhelming medical doubt he
seems to be standing by some of his
claims I actually do personally believe
in the items that I talk about in the
show I passionately study them I
recognize that oftentimes they don't
have the scientific muster to present as
fat but that's the whole point you're
presenting it as a doctor if you want to
keep spouting this that's fine
but don't call it your show dr. oz call
it check this out with son God
knows Mehmet just
title to be fair the problem is this
Senate hearing is going to achieve
nothing for a very chilling reason
beyond embarrassing dr. oz there's very
little that Congress can do in this
arena it is the Federal Trade
Commission's job to go after online
scams and even they Yale can only
scratch the surface she's right dr. oz
is just a symptom of the problem the
disease is the fact that dietary
supplements in the US are shockingly
unregulated there are two agencies who
theoretically oversee things the FTC and
the FDA the FTC is supposed to regulate
the marketing of supplements but by
their own admission they give great
deference to the FDA on whether a
company's health claim can be supported
the problem with that is the FDA has
little authority to investigate the
contents of supplements until people are
already getting sick from them that
sounds crazy and in the past they
actually tried to change this in the
late 1980s 38 people died from
l-tryptophan supplements and in response
the FDA tried to expand its authority
how did that go
in 1993 the industry struck back
consumers were urged to write to their
congressman or told they may have to
kiss their vitamin C goodbye so did
people write to their congressman more
people wrote to Congress about the
supplement bill then wrote about the
Vietnam War
what how good must the pro-vitamin
protest songs have been ginseng huh what
is it good for sexual dysfunction of
type two diabetes
so you Daniel actually there were
actually no protests on but there were
PSAs put out by the supplement industry
featuring not just jackbooted thugs
coming to take your vitamins but a
surprise celebrity cameo breathe hey
guys it's only vitamins if you don't
want to lose your vitamins make the FDA
stop call the US Senate and tell them
that you want to take your vitamins in
peace if enough of us do that it'll work
Oh 1993 it was a different time
when you could plausibly say hey be
quiet everybody
let's all listen to what Mel Gibson has
to show and the supplement industry
didn't just pay for ads they gave money
to lawmakers like Republican senator
Orrin Hatch and Democratic Senator Tom
Harkin this was then back then they
actually became the two top recipients
of funds from the industry and in a
crazy coincidence they co-sponsored a
bill to deregulate it I send to the desk
a substitute amendment on behalf of
senators hatch and Harkin today we
honored the wishes of 100 million people
consumers of dietary supplements people
who simply want the ability to lead
healthy lifestyles without the constant
intervention of one tiny agency which is
possessed by a regulatory zeal equaling
none regulatory zeal he just criticized
a regulatory agency for being too into
regulating things that's like accusing
your podiatrist of having a foot fetish
dude dude dude you you're obsessed with
feet it just tone it down a bit now the
supplement industry will claim that it
is one of the more highly regulated
industries see how true you think that
is because if you're a supplement
company today you do not need approval
from the FDA before a product is
marketed you can make health claims
without prior approved
all from the government and you don't
have to prove the safety or
effectiveness of your products before
putting it up for sale the industry is
essentially supposed to police itself
that's not one of those porn sites that
asks you to enter your own age which
basically just ends up teaching children
how to subtract 18 from the current year
it doesn't work which may explain why
since 1994 the supplement industry has
gone from making four billion dollars to
thirty two billion dollars a year with
almost no side effects people who
consume tainted dietary supplements have
suffered from negative side effects like
severe bleeding strokes liver damage or
even death health officials say the
common item linked to several recent
cases of acute liver failure in Hawaii
is oxyelite pro Orioles pitcher Steve
bechler who died after taking a federer
during last spring training ephedra
stayed on the market an extra two years
after many experts asked for a ban
meantime the number of deaths rose to
155 with 16,000 adverse events wow
that's enough to make you wish for an
agency with a certain amount of them
what's the phrase regulatory zeal and
yet lawmakers still resist regulation
because when two years ago a bill was
proposed suggesting supplements should
carry warning labels about potentially
dangerous side effects you'll never
guess who popped up again the FDA
already has a tremendous amount of
regulatory oversight and enforcement
tools when it comes to dietary
supplements every supplement has a label
has the ingredients and the potency by
law on every single item that is sold as
a supplement that's right Hatchin harken
who in 2012 had retained their title of
the top two recipients of campaign funds
from the supplement industry see two
decades later those campaign
contributions still working
who says nutritional supplements don't
have long-lasting effects
and by the way on the point that Senator
Harkin made about how every supplement
has a label saying what's inside it well
funny story when a group of researchers
recently DNA tested supplements from a
dozen North American companies they
found that one-third contained no trace
whatsoever of the plant advertised on
the bottle if one in three milk bottles
didn't contain milk you might think
twice about pouring the white mystery
liquid all over your cereal but none of
this is likely to change because
companies have access to the one
genuinely truly effective wonder drug
it's called lobbying and here's how the
science works FDA regulation can really
stop up your profits jamming up your
whole money-making system which can lead
to painful effects on the company's
bottom line but with lobbying somehow
legal process all those pesky
regulations just melt away into
nothingness giving you that comfortable
corporate feeling of money
almost uncontrollably ask your lawyers
if lobbying is right for you
none of that stock none of this answers
the key dr. oz question now he says he
wasn't paid to mention any particular
products so why say those things on TV
at all in intent to engage viewers I use
flowery language I used language that
was very passionate that makes sense
because we're all looking for flowery
language from our physicians like the
sunlight shines upon the hidden grassy
meadow
so does chlamydia cast a warm glow upon
your private parts and when he says
engaging viewers that is the problem
perhaps his fatal flaw is that he's done
870 daily hour-long shows about health
and medicine which is impossible sooner
or later you're going to get tired of
doing shows about what your poop should
look like with Cameron Diaz this is ever
happen to you and luckily no I'm not a
girl that gets constipated good good for
you lucky you Diaz lucky you and instead
of that you're gonna get tempted to
overstretch and do a show with a title
like can an aspirin a day keep cancer
away to which the answer is clearly no
not not entirely because I feel like if
it did we wouldn't be hearing about it
for the first time at 4:00 p.m. on a
Wednesday afternoon hey did you hear
that I cured cancer no I was watching
Wendy Williams and look the frustrating
thing is it's easy to fill a show with
shameless pandering without dangerously
misleading medical information here I'll
show you I'll show you pandering that
you wouldn't believe hey everyone
wouldn't it be great if we had a Skype
interview with george RR martin the
writer of Game of Thrones
let's do it hey George George ha how's
the writing going I just killed
threatened your favorite character what
it's not aria it's not aria is it George
is not Aria please tell me it's not aria
just give me a clue damn you Martin okay
what what people seem to like that and
no one got hurt so let's keep pandering
um everyone likes puppies don't they
he's a puppy right now here's a puppy
hello puppy in know puppy look look
neither I nor a puppy are making
unsubstantiated claims about potentially
harmful dietary supplements you're not
doing that are you puppy look because
you don't need to do you precious you
don't need to unlock look here's a
here's something else that people like
women in trashy dresses throwing wine in
each other's faces
um go ladies calm down it's all
fabricated
let's keep pandering um who wants a
t-shirt
who wants a
people love t-shirts they know t-shirts
almost as much as they love celebrities
dancing and guess what his Steve Buscemi
tap dancing
we even know
any thoughts the only questionable
benefits of dietary supplements Oh John
this isn't really the time or place for
that discussion
exactly that's the point see dr. Moss
we've done it we engage viewers without
recommending any unregulated products we
can reduce diabetes please welcome the
black and gold Marty elite
you